---
layout: post
title: "Ruby on Rails - I'm kind of late to the game"
date: 2013-11-22 09:00:00 -0700
comments: true
categories: ruby rails code programming
---
Recently I started a new side project. This one I'm going to finish all the way 
through. Like many people who enjoy programming as a profession and hobby, I 
tend to start a lot of projects where I learn something and move on. The project 
tends to serve its purpose and then I'm able to tackle something bigger or that 
is more interesting to me at the moment.

This idea is different. I want to use it on the regular. And I'm sure others 
will too. So naturally I was ready to roll instantly and hit the ground running. 
Normally I work on a project with another person, +Clint Shuman, but he hasn't 
been as available lately since his wife recently gave birth to their son.
<!--more-->
Lately I've been approaching all problems the same way: nail, meet hammer. I 
decided when approaching this one to try building a couple of things in two 
frameworks - django and rails. Rails has scaffolding, which is a lot of code I'm 
probably going to replace, but I can get pieces up and going with CRUD almost 
instantly. This is really handy when I'm just trying to establish relationships 
and see how things are going to work. Django is still quick with class-based 
views (CBV), but there's just something about how rails works that is nice.

I told Clint I was learning rails and the first thing he said was "Traitor." I 
admit to feeling that way somewhat. Python is a fantastic language. I can't help 
but wish I could combine the rails framework with Python. And Django is 
completely open-ended. Implement any app any way you want. Sure, there are 
conventions, but Python is certainly configuration first. Rails is pretty much 
the opposite. In fact, the saying that goes along with the framework is 
"Convention over configuration." Since I don't know the language very well this 
doesn't bother me. Forcing me to do something a certain way is fine because I 
probably don't understand fully what's happening right now. It will be 
interesting to see how much I like this notion the longer I spend working with 
the framework.

But for a beginner, Django can be difficult. The tutorials that are out there 
are ok, but not fantastic. It always seems like reading helper information on 
Django expects you to know a lot already. And that's just not realistic. Rails 
has been around for ten years now and is widely used because it became the 
popular thing to do. The plethora of tutorial and screencasts for it makes the 
prospect of learning it much easier.

Still...I miss Python at night. I'll come home soon, Python. For now, I have a 
project I want to see completely through to finish. That is, hosted and live for 
everyone. And I'm going to do the whole thing in Rails.
