---
layout: post
title: "Computer Science Degrees - What's Lacking"
date: 2014-03-07 09:00:00 -0700
comments: true
categories: school education programming courses college CS education technology
---
I've been continuing to take classes despite working as a full-time developer. I
work in the .Net world, but my heart is more in Python. Still, I wanted exposure
to plenty of others and I'm currently in my second class on C++.

What I have noticed in the various courses I have taken at institutions of higher
learning is that they don't teach anything remotely close to the real world. I
know this is a common claim and people cry out against the undergraduate program
not preparing people for the real world. I get that. But I have always dismissed
them.
<!--more-->
Being a better, more rounded thinker is more important than job training, is it
not? Surely it is. I'm not sure why no one slapped me. I've had that discussion a
number of times with people. I should have been slapped. Now don't get me wrong.
I value and love my education. I have a degree in Politics from the University of
New Hampshire. I am versed in various literature and can hold discussions on a
number of topics (at one point I could almost do so in French).

But this is a false dichotomy. It's as if the premise only allows well-rounded
education or job training. That's ridiculous.

I believe what Computer Science majors need is less Assignment-based instruction
and more Project-based instruction. Random assignments that are isolated from
each other, meaning accomplishing one has no effect on accomplishing another,
don't provide the type of reinforcement that maximizes the mind we need molded
in academia. Completing a larger project with multiple parts is far more useful
to the student. These parts interact with one another. One of the best lessons
to learn early on is that changing code in one place can have small or large
effects on other parts of code.

It's difficult to learn that in assignments that are 50-150 lines. But if you're
building on top of the product/project you're working on all semester, you will
naturally run in to those types of consequences and suddenly your student will
begin to think very differently. I value those that can think holistically about
a product rather than the frustratingly common linear thinker that says to the
team "Well, I'll just change this and then it'll be fixed." I love it when I
hear someone say "Well, if we change that there could be implications to these
other parts."

Admittedly, I think there's a lot of cruft in undergraduate coursework these
days. Taking art history doesn't make you a better thinker per se. You don't
experience art in an art history class. You learn what you need to say about a
particular painting/sculpture/etc. in order to demonstrate knowledge about the
piece. We cannot say that a mathematics major is more well-rounded for taking
such a course. Well-rounded according to whom? And how pompous to believe that
one semester of being told what to think about paintings and what is meant to be
conveyed by them makes an individual more well-rounded.

There's value in education for the sake of education. I don't argue against that
and in fact, as a serial student, I'm quite fond of education for its own sake.
However, the prototypical pedagogy associated with the usual assortment of
subjects and course material falls short when it comes to Computer Science.
Programming is a craft. [It takes years to
master](http://norvig.com/21-days.html). There are many other disciplines where
this is similar, so why not change the teaching style?

Students experience a couple of introductory courses and then are expected to
understand high level concepts. In my opinion, going through academia has the
primary purpose of learning how to think which implicitly means application.
Anyone who argues against that should be beaten with a stick. Socrates explored
the meta, but he focused his knowledge on teaching and applying - even if the
application was theoretical (see The Republic). If our goal is to teach people
how to think, let's make use of the discipline. Sorting arrays is great. It's
very helpful to understand a binary versus bubble sort and why one is faster or
better in certain scenarios.

But we're a community of people that build things. We command the electron to do
our bidding. We engage in digital alchemy. We are the citizens of an industry
governed by [Moore's law](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore%27s_law) and yet we
tacitly accept that there's not a better way to gain an education in our medium?

I reject that.

Let's build better coursework by building projects with students. When a student
ends a semester with a (probably) working application that has been built in
stages with a decent feature list there is a sense of accomplishment and a
demonstrable grasp of the concepts this project instilled.
